+++
title = "Linear algebra assumption"
author = ["littlehome"]
date = 2023-11-17
lastmod = 2023-11-21T11:47:36+09:00
draft = false
+++

## what we have {#what-we-have}


### (P1) From linear dependent \\( n \\) vectors, we can have \\(n-1\\) vectors which span the same set. {#p1--from-linear-dependent-n-vectors-we-can-have-n-1-vectors-which-span-the-same-set-dot}

This is true because "dependent" and "span" actually means the same thing.


### (P2) # of independent vectors &lt; # of spanning vector (finite dimensional) {#p2--of-independent-vectors-of-spanning-vector--finite-dimensional}

For a spanning set, we could add a vector from the independent set.
This act will plug out a dependent vector because of P1


## What we want to prove {#what-we-want-to-prove}


### Every subspace of a finite-dimensional vector space is finite-dimensional. {#every-subspace-of-a-finite-dimensional-vector-space-is-finite-dimensional-dot}

1.  A: is it infinite?
    B: No
2.  A: Does it have finite spanning list?
    1.  A: Does it have a vector?
        B: yes

        A: Let's call it \\(v\_1\\).

        1.  B: Does it mean we have a way to select \\( v\_1 \\)?
            A: No
        2.  A: How about assuming we are given \\(v\_1\\)
            B: Ok
        3.  A: Can we ask if it spans?

            B: What if we can't tell?

            A: How about assuming the answer was given?

            B: Are we assuming there is no inbetween span &amp; non-span?

            A: Yes

            B: Can we be sure?
            A: Yes

            B: How?
            A: That's our assumption. That \\( \text{span}(v\_1, ... v\_n) ?= \text{ subspace} \\) is well defined. ie it has a truth value.

            B: So, we can say, a mathematical construct is assumed to have property of `deterministic` and `identity` ? (Let's call this, `A1` our assumption)

            e.g. `(P3)` A subspace has a property `set_member` where set_member(subspace) is deterministic and doesn't change.

            Ok. let's go back

3.  B: Let's go back to vector selection, if we have a set of vectors \\( V^s \\), we can test spanness. (eqality to a vector space)
    1.  B: if our set of vector spans, we are good.
        otherwise, add other vector v
        1.  B: P2 says, if I have spanning set \\(V^s \\), \\( \text{len}(V^s) \leq n \\), but it doesn't say there will be such \\(V^s\\).

            Wait, we can use `A1` here? How do we invoke A1 here?

            1.  We can think of all \\( V^s \\) and hence we can say "existance of finite \\( \text{span}(V^s)\\)"
            2.  "existance of finite \\( \text{span}(V^s)\\)" is a mathematical statement and is assumed to have the property `A1`

        2.  A: By P3, we can always say our \\(V^s\\) is either span or not-span.
            If not-span, we are saying there `exists` a vector which is in subspace but not in \\( \text{span}(V^s) \\)

            So we bring in this vector and add to our \\( V^s \\)

            B: So `A1` (which seems a static property) gives us existential construction process, interesting.

            B: and adding a vector can't go over the subspace, because 'closedness' of vector space forbits "splitting over" by adding a new vector.
            So we again end up where we are either spanning or non-spanning.

            So all we needed was, that a set can be compared. Comparison here means, we can test if there's a vector in one set not in another.


### <span class="org-todo done QUESTION">QUESTION</span> But then, how do we know it's safe to assume P3 is true? {#but-then-how-do-we-know-it-s-safe-to-assume-p3-is-true}

Or are we just saying, let's assume P3 is true?

For a number, I have no problem with saying \\( n1 = n2 \\) or \\( n1 \neq n2 \\).

P3 just asserts a mathematical object 'set' has the same property.

I guess I'm just not sure if we can plugin in any 'set' such as all polynomials and be sure if P3 applies to this set.
