+++
title = "Measurement"
date = 2023-10-20
lastmod = 2023-10-20T15:36:21+09:00
draft = false
+++

## chatgpt conversation {#chatgpt-conversation}

<https://chat.openai.com/share/424a4cc4-9ff3-469b-9e3c-c2ce4db355c1>


## [Relative strength of two countires]({{< relref "2023-10-20-measure-of-country-power#israel-vs-palestinian" >}}) <span class="tag"><span class="economics">economics</span><span class="_investing">@investing</span></span> {#relative-strength-of-two-countires--2023-10-20-measure-of-country-power-dot-md}

What's their brief history?

How Israel is holding against bigger countries surrounding it?
Leads to the question of How to measure relative strength of country.

In order to measure relative strength of country, not just aggregate GDP, but the shape of the wealth distribution might be relavant, and it leads to the next topic


## [Mathematical definition of distribution of wealth]({{< relref "2023-10-20-variance#mathematical-definition-of-distribution-of-wealth" >}}) <span class="tag"><span class="_investing">@investing</span><span class="math">math</span></span> {#mathematical-definition-of-distribution-of-wealth--2023-10-20-variance-dot-md}

There are many definition of spread.

I delve into what is the meaning of spread, because its kinda non-intuitive to regard std as the standard way of measuring spread.

So spread is not something defined in the outer universe, it's a construct we made up and can be defined by MAD or STD.
But then mathematicians lean towards platonic view where something like &pi; is discovered and not invented.
I asked chatgpt the opinion on this matter.

And for a more practical treatment of discover vs invent, I turn on to next subject


## [What can be debated?]({{< relref "2023-10-20-variance#mathematical-definition-of-distribution-of-wealth" >}}) {#what-can-be-debated--2023-10-20-variance-dot-md}

Does debate assume an assertion that can be decided as true or false?


## [Study of complex system]({{< relref "2023-10-20-study-information-speed#how-information-flows-might-be-interesting-topic" >}}) <span class="tag"><span class="IA">IA</span><span class="_investing">@investing</span></span> {#study-of-complex-system--2023-10-20-study-information-speed-dot-md}

How information flows and why it lags is an interesting angle to look at a stock market.

I wanna delve deeper on the relation to notion of inertia (where most motion seems to preserve what it's doing over doing something else) in some other context as well. maybe later..
