+++
title = "Perspective"
author = ["littlehome"]
date = 2023-11-27
lastmod = 2023-11-28T12:56:04+09:00
draft = false
+++

## Perspective {#perspective}

I'm studying investing

Why?


## Survivor {#survivor}

<https://youtu.be/KRy2oU0Df5k?si=R47vLli0JV3S3O-Y>


### Three kinds of people {#three-kinds-of-people}

시골의사 박경철, Jeremy Rifkin

-   creator
    Ford: A car can take you anywhere, a train can move on a fixed path
-   facilitator
    Rockfeller: People will need gas for cars
-   etc
    NY times: Ford made a car which can carry 4 but cost the money to build a train which can carry hundreds
    Phone: who would want that expensive phone, we have beepers


### The goal, the perspective {#the-goal-the-perspective}

Why are you dividing the three types of human that way?

Because they enhance human being? or because you want to be better than others?
It's subtle, but it's easy to get swayed toward the later.

Are big companies building AI to enhance human experience? or are they building AI not to get behind?


#### <span class="org-todo done QUESTION">QUESTION</span> Does it matter? {#does-it-matter}

Stock market may exist to circulate money to the most needed.
But do investers really think that way?
Probably not, but it helps anyway.


#### <span class="org-todo done QUESTION">QUESTION</span> When does it matter? {#when-does-it-matter}

Obviously pushing the above argument further, we may not need to judge what we are doing is sensible, it all comes around (it can lead to the backward thinking where whatever we are doing is worthwhile because otherwise it wouldn't have happened)


### Center of universe {#center-of-universe}

Those people are the center of universe.
I want to be the center of universe.

Steve Jobs: Make a dent in the universe.


### Truth {#truth}

Musk: I want a truth. (and I think he's thinking "I know the truth. Information theory is underlying truth")


#### VS things we don't know are far bigger {#vs-things-we-don-t-know-are-far-bigger}


## Being {#being}

<https://youtu.be/PACpvHgJ9HM?si=qsglEtbsmYhrki2i>


### Meaning {#meaning}

Meaning is ailment of human mind.

Life is burdensome, I want a meaning for the burden I'm bearing.

Whe you are joyful, you don't ask what is the meaning of life.


#### <span class="org-todo done QUESTION">QUESTION</span> Do you not need meaning then? {#do-you-not-need-meaning-then}

It's not like you don't need meaning. You may be joyful because of meaning, but you are not obssessed with it.


### AI, Logic {#ai-logic}

In the past, people were reluctant to welcome the technological advance: the machine can do in 1 day what I do for 30 days.
What would I do with my muscle?

Now, machine will do what my intellect used to do. What am I gonna do if the machine does what my intellect has been doing?


#### Logic is the foundation {#logic-is-the-foundation}

Logic is important and forms the base. But living in the basement is painful.
Living in logic is painful.
When Ai takes care of our basic logic, we are free to be more humane.


### Save Soil {#save-soil}

We are losing the source of energy.
We are expecting mental illness in many people because of the deficiancy of energy.


#### Losing foundation {#losing-foundation}

Microbial life in soil is the foundation of our life.
27000 species are going extinct every year.


### Jasmine {#jasmine}

Life is a fragrance of jasmine upon gentle spring breeze.


#### VS I'm better than you {#vs-i-m-better-than-you}


## So why study investing? {#so-why-study-investing}


### Fun {#fun}


### Survival {#survival}

-   need money
-   When mechanics replace horse, I need to know what mechanics are about


### Meaning {#meaning}

-   When mechanics, nuke, etc is on the brink of birth, when the sudden changes are eminent, it might be wise to be cautionery.

    AI investing might bring a big change as well.
